So we're gonna talk about global
state management with Pinia.
Pinia, if you don't know,
I believe it's French for pineapple and
basically it is a successor to Vuex.
So if you've heard from the React
community about Redux patterns and
those kind of thing, Pinia is
the evolution of that because Vue did take
inspiration from the Redux pattern.
So we had Vuex for a very long time.
But there were some ergonomics with it
that made it kind of tricky to work with
over the long period of time.
And so Pinia with the composition API has
basically been the evolution of Vuex.
Okay, so in terms of Pinia,
let's take a look at what that looks like.
All right, because global state management
typically is a fairly complicated topic.
So first of all, be sure to pin
their docs, pinia.vuejs.org.
Once again, this is an officially
supported view library.
And it's got this cute little mascot,
which I need to get some stickers of.
And basically, Pinia, funny enough what
started out as just like an experiment
that Eduardo also known as Posva,
who actually wrote Vue Router was kind of
experimenting with how
we might reinvent Vuex.
And so
he kind of came up with this idea and
it's gained a lot of popularity and
so thus it is now the official one.
Okay, so the show that actually
we're gonna go ahead and
do is on the playground.
I'm gonna go ahead and
just install it right now.
So install npm install Pinia.
And so once again, let's go and
see how we know that we're using it.
We can go ahead and
look inside of the package.json.
And as we see here, we'll see vue-router,
and we see pinia now.
Now, the only thing we need to do before
we need to continue using it though,
is just like the router.
We need to tell vue that we're
using this plugin basically.
And so inside of our main.ts,
we get the opportunity to now
create basically a pinia instance.
How does that work?
It's just like vue router actually.
So we can import createPinia from pinia.
As I just show you that again.
This time it actually autocomplete,
there you go now that's right.
And so remember that multilane
thing I was telling you about.
So this is where this is super helpful.
Because we can say const
pinia = createPinia and
then after that after we use the router,
we can just say app.use(pinia).
There you go.
And just like that you have
Pinia enabled on your app.
So, how does Pinia actually work, right?
Creating stores and stuff this is stuff
again is typically very complicated.
But I think I've set you all up to
kind of see what it's actually like.
What we're gonna do is we
create a folder called stores.
Because what are these, after all?
What are we trying to track?
We're trying to track stores of data.
So what are we creating?
We're creating a directory for
stores, why?
Because when it comes to
global state management,
they're typically referred to as stores of
the data of the actions we need to take in
order to make changes
to those data stores.
So, let's go ahead and
insert this playground this time.
We notice that we have this
count store over here.
Let's go ahead and
recreate this over here.
So I'm gonna do CountStore and
I'm just gonna do it in Pascal case
just to make it look different.
And what does that look
like now inside of Pinia?
Well, let's go ahead and define the store.
As we look at the docs here, we're gonna
do things very composition API like.
We're gonna import defineStore from pinia.
And then what we're going to do then is
export a const of use whatever the count
store or whatever the store name is.
So useCountStore is typically
what is like what is called.
So use appended to this.
And then we call the defineStore in here.
Now the difference is, is one,
we first start by defining how we
want like the store to be labeled.
So I usually just call it countStore,
like whatever it's already
called inside of the file name.
And then after that you get
an object that you get to configure.
And inside of here,
it's gonna look kind of familiar.
So one,
you get a state option to return data.
There is a getters option.
And there is an actions option.
And so you might think,
this looks familiar.
This looks a little bit like options.
And it does in the sense that it's
providing you structure at how you manage
your state.
Guess what we saw the composition API
earlier is that you can kind of wrangle
together whatever you want.
But this, especially when we
think about global stores,
it's actually useful to have
a convention for everyone to follow.
Because you don't really don't want it to
be like the wild wild west when it comes
to people managing and accessing data.
And something else that you
might notice too, though,
missing from here especially for my fellow
Vuex users, there are no mutations.
And that is probably one of the best
things about Pinia is that,
when we have something in
here like count zero and
we want to increment the count all
we got to do is go this.count ++.
And it takes care of everything for you.
No more creating this separate thing
that's like a mutation that requires you
to call in action and
then the mutation is basically redundant
of the thing that you're trying to do.
That's all gone.
And so if we think of this,
another way to alias it,
just to provide that mental
model Data > Computed > Methods.
That's what you have.
And so if we compare this over now to
the CountStore that we originally sort
of scaffolded ourselves together
inside of the composables.
You'll see here how different the code
is in the sense that this is just kind
of however I feel like, and
however I chose to write it.
But you get an additional benefit,
actually,
that I'll show you in right here.
So let's say,
let's add the increment amount to 80.
And then this one is going to
be += this.incrementAmount,
because this should look familiar to our
base countStore that we've done before.
And then we'll have a doubleCount here,
that will be a function that
receives the state as an argument.
And we just return state.count times two,
just like that.
And then I mess something up because I
use the comma instead of a period, boom.
Okay, how is this any different
than what we just did?
So we have this right here, and
I'm going to leave this to the right so
that we have this as a reference.
Now, inside of our base counter.
This time what I'm gonna do is we're gonna
go ahead and actually import this store.
So import useCounterStore or
useCountStore, it looks like.
There you go.
It actually detected it properly.
So we are getting some type auto
completion, which is super nice.
And this time,
we'll do a const newCountStore,
which will be the useCountStore like this.
Just like that.
And then we're gonna return newCountStore,
just like that.
Okay, so what do we get out of this?
One, I'm gonna show you what it
looks like when we actually use it.
So let me bring that back over here,
this is great.
Okay, so first thing is that now
that you have your CountStore.
What you actually end up finding
out is that when we look
at something like Third Counter Version.
So when we look inside of here,
you're gonna notice that we
get auto completion here.
It actually can detect properties on that
store now to get a lot of auto completion
out of this.
So in other words if we take a look,
increment is actually sitting right here.
It actually knows that
it's a property now.
And so there's a lot of work being
done underneath to help with
the intelligence of what's going
on when you're managing your code.
And so here, we can do count, for example,
and then as you can see, it's zero.
But actually very easily if we
added a button, we can just say,
newCountStore.increment.
And then New Increment.
Then you can see, it just works.
And the reason why I kind of preface
this with how global stores are normally
complicated.
This should actually remind you of the
composable we kind of designed ourselves.
You have this thing called CountStore.
Again, it learns from the options API
takes the advantage of the option API
by providing some structure.
Gives you the chance to
manipulate it as you see fit.
But then when you call it,
it feels just as natural as using
any other part of the data.
Whereas in a lot of other state
managements that I've used before there's
usually a lot in terms of like going
in to fetch a certain thing and
then auto completion
becomes a bit of a pain.
If you use Vuex you knew that
you had to type the string
exactly a certain way to
initiate a certain action.
There was a lot of opportunities for
mistakes.
But with this, it's easy for
us to understand what's happening.
And on top of that,
I'm always a big fan of conventions,
especially when it comes to debugging.
We know that state management
is notoriously difficult to do.
And so, if you take a look right here,
you'll notice that another benefit you get
by using Pinia,
is that you get this dev tool right here.
And we can actually go ahead and start
inspecting it and doing stuff just like
you normally would want to do when
you're debugging a large application.
And the other thing that again it feels
really natural as we do this right now is
that unlike a global state management
store like the way Vuex used to be,
you used to have to
intentionally namespace modules.
In other words, you have to be like from
this global piece only take this small
piece and import it here.
Only take this small piece and
import it here.
But then sometimes you still ended up with
like importing everything at once, right?
So Vuex stores became rather cumbersome
and people had trouble with that.
But with this new model of like
a compostable about Pinia,
this is actually modular by default.
You only import the stores
you need where you need them.
And so almost without even thinking
about it, you've solved the performance
bottleneck that might have naturally
occurred in an enterprise grade app.
Where you have the singleton tracking
global state, everyone just chucking stuff
in there because they can or
is the easiest thing to do.
But now it almost is just as easy to go.
Wait, my functionality is about login.
I'm gonna create a login store.
I'm not gonna toss it in the global state.
I'm gonna actually think
of it modular first.
And the fact that it's namespace modular
first, I think that's wonderful because it
encourages us to use best practices
without even realizing it.
And they are some of the best sort of
advances that we can have when it comes to
developer toy.